                                            Maintaining Information in Fully-Dynamic




arXiv:cs/0310065v2 [cs.DS] 21 Nov 2003
                                                      Trees with Top Trees∗
                                          Stephen Alstrup†           Jacob Holm‡   Kristian de Lichtenberg§
                                                                       Mikkel Thorup¶

                                                                             Abstract
                                                   We introduce top trees as a design of a new simpler interface for
                                               data structures maintaining information in a fully-dynamic forest. We
                                               demonstrate how easy and versatile they are to use on a host of differ-
                                               ent applications. For example, we show how to maintain the diameter,
                                               center, and median of each tree in the forest. The forest can be up-
                                               dated by insertion and deletion of edges and by changes to vertex and
                                               edge weights. Each update is supported in O(log n) time, where n is
                                               the size of the tree(s) involved in the update. Also, we show how to
                                               support nearest common ancestor queries and level ancestor queries
                                               with respect to arbitrary roots in O(log n) time. Finally, with marked
                                               and unmarked vertices, we show how to compute distances to a near-
                                               est marked vertex. The later has applications to approximate nearest
                                               marked vertex in general graphs, and thereby to static optimization
                                               problems over shortest path metrics.
                                                   Technically speaking, top trees are easily implemented either with
                                               Frederickson’s topology trees [Ambivalent Data Structures for Dy-
                                               namic 2-Edge-Connectivity and k Smallest Spanning Trees, SIAM J.
                                               Comput. 26 (2) pp. 484–538, 1997] or with Sleator and Tarjan’s dy-
                                               namic trees [A Data Structure for Dynamic Trees. J. Comput. Syst.
                                           ∗
                                              This paper includes work presented at ICALP’97 [1] and SWAT’00 [2].
                                           †
                                              The IT University of Copenhagen, Glentevej 67, DK-2400, Denmark.
                                         E-Mail: stephen@it-c.dk
                                            ‡
                                              The IT University of Copenhagen, Glentevej 67, DK-2400, Denmark.
                                         E-Mail: jholm@it-c.dk
                                            §
                                              Fogedmarken 12, 2tv, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. E-Mail: kdl@k2.dk Work
                                         done while master’s student at University of Copenhagen.
                                           ¶
                                              AT&T Labs–Research, E-Mail: mthorup@research.att.com


                                                                                 1
      Sc. 26 (3) pp. 362–391, 1983]. However, we claim that the inter-
      face is simpler for many applications, and indeed our new bounds are
      quadratic improvements over previous bounds where they exist.


1     Introduction
In this paper, we introduce top trees as a new simpler interface for data struc-
tures maintaining information in a fully-dynamic forest. Here fully-dynamic
means that edges may be both inserted and deleted. The information could
be, say, the diameter of each tree in the forest. However, if the tree is a mini-
mum spanning tree of a dynamic graph, the information could help changing
the minimum spanning tree as the graph changes.
    Technically speaking, top trees are easily implemented either with Freder-
ickson’s topology trees [14] or with Sleator and Tarjan’s dynamic trees [30].
The contribution of top trees is the design of an interface providing users
with easier access to the full power of these advanced techniques.
    Targeting a broad audience of potential users, the bulk of this paper is
like a tutorial where we demonstrate the flexibility of top trees in different
types of applications:

    • We re-derive some of the classic applications from [14, 30], e.g., finding
      the maximum weight of a given path.

    • We improve some previous bounds. More specifically, we show how
      to maintain the centers and medians of trees in a dynamic forest in
      O(log n) time per updates. The previous bounds were O(log2 n) time
      [7, 3].

    • We consider problems that appear not to have been studied before for
      a dynamic forest. For example, we show how to maintain the diameters
      of trees in a dynamic forest. We also show how to answer level ancestor
      and nearest common ancestor queries with respect to arbitrary roots.
      Finally, with marked and unmarked vertices, we show how to compute
      distances to a nearest marked vertex. In all of these cases, we support
      both updates and queries in logarithmic time. The marking result has
      applications to approximate nearest marked vertex in general graphs,
      and thereby to static optimization problems over shortest path metrics.



                                       2
We note that finding medians and centers is more difficult than, e.g., finding
the minimum edge on a given path because they are “non-local” properties.
Here, by a local property we mean that if an edge or a vertex has the property
in a tree, then it has the property in all subtrees it appears in. Local prop-
erties lend themselves nicely to bottom-up computations, whereas non-local
properties tend to be more challenging. Building on top of our top trees, we
present here a quite general technique for dealing with non-local properties.
    We implement our top trees with Frederickson’s topology trees [14], which
we in turn implement with Sleator and Tarjan’s st-trees [30]. The implemen-
tation of topology trees with st-trees was not known. It has the interest-
ing consequence that the simple amortized version of st-trees gives a simple
amortized version of topology trees.
    We note that since top trees were originally announced [1], they have
found applications in other works [16, 22, 33]. All these applications rely
on results presented in this paper. Also, our specific result for dynamic tree
diameters has found its own application in [25].

1.1    Preliminaries
Most of this paper concerns a forest of trees, which means that if vertices v
and w are connected, they are connected by a unique path, which we shall
denote v · · · w.
    When we talk about an edge (v, w), on an implementation level, we often
really think of an identifier e of the undirected edge with end-points v and
w. Via arrays, the end-points can be found from the identifier e in constant
time. However, other information can also be associated with e such as its
successor and predecessor in the incidence lists around v and w.

1.2    Contents
The paper is organized as follows. In § 2 we introduce top trees and solve the
diameter problem. In § 3 we present our technique for non-local problems,
and solve the center and median problems. In § 4 we discuss the advantages
and limitations of using top trees relative to other data structures for dynamic
trees. In § 5 we mention some generalizations of top trees used in later papers.
Finally, in § 6 we implement top trees with topology trees and topology trees
with st-trees. Finally, we have some concluding remarks in § 7.


                                       3
          (1)                                    (3)




    (2)
                                       (4)                           (5)




Figure 1: The cases of joining two neighboring clusters into one. The •
are the boundary vertices of the joined cluster and the ◦ are the boundary
vertices of the children clusters that did not become boundary vertices of
the joined cluster. Finally the dashed line is the cluster path of the joined
cluster.

2         Top Trees
A top tree is defined based on a pair consisting of a tree T and a set ∂T of at
most 2 vertices from T , called external boundary vertices. Given (T, ∂T ), any
subtree C of T has a set ∂(T,∂T ) C of boundary vertices which are the vertices
of C that are either in ∂T or incident to an edge in T leaving C. Here, by a
subtree of an undirected tree, we mean any connected subgraph. The subtree
C is called a cluster of (T, ∂T ) if it has at least one edge and at most two
boundary vertices. Then T is itself a cluster with ∂(T,∂T ) T = ∂T . Also, if A
is a subtree of C, ∂(C,∂(T,∂T ) C) A = ∂(T,∂T ) A, so A is a cluster of (C, ∂(T,∂T ) C) if
and only if A is a cluster of (T, ∂T ). Since ∂(T,∂T ) is a canonical generalization
of ∂ from T to all subtrees of T , we will use ∂ as a shorthand for ∂(T,∂T ) in
the rest of the paper.
    A top tree R over (T, ∂T ) is a binary tree such that:

    1. The nodes of R are clusters of (T, ∂T ).

    2. The leaves of R are the edges of T .

    3. Sibling clusters are neighbors in the sense that they intersect in a single
       vertex, and then their parent cluster is their union (see Fig. 1).

    4. The root of R is T itself.


                                             4
A tree with a single vertex has an empty top tree. The basic philosophy
is that clusters are induced by their edges, the vertices only being included
as their end-points. This is why clusters need at least one edge, and we
note that neighboring clusters are induced by disjoint edge sets inducing a
common vertex.
    We will sometimes refer to the tree T as the underlying tree to differen-
tiate it from the top tree R.
    The top trees over the trees in our underlying forest are maintained under
the following forest updates:
link((v, w)): where v and w are in different trees, links these trees by
    adding the edge (v, w) to our dynamic forest.
cut(e): removes the edge e from our dynamic forest.
expose(v, w): where v and w are in the same tree T , makes v and w the
   external boundary vertices of T . Moreover, expose returns the new root
   cluster of the top tree over T .
   expose can also be called with zero or one vertices as argument if we
   want less than two external boundary vertices. If expose is called with
   zero arguments, as expose(), it does not return a root cluster. This is
   because there may be multiple trees, and without an argument, expose
   cannot know what tree we are interested in. Finally, it is guaranteed
   that expose() does not change the structure of the top trees. It only
   affects some of the boundaries of the clusters in the top trees.
In general, link and cut make the set of external boundary vertices for the
resulting trees empty. To accommodate these forest updates, the top trees
are changed by a sequence of local top tree modifications described below.
During these modifications, we will temporarily accept a partial top tree
whose root cluster may not be a whole underlying tree T but just a cluster
of T .
e := create(): creates a top tree with a single cluster e which is just an edge.
C := join(A, B): where A and B are neighboring root clusters of two top
   trees RA and RB . Creates a new cluster C = A ∪ B and makes it the
   common root of A and B, thus turning RA and RB into a single new
   top tree RC . Finally, the new root cluster C is returned.
split(C): where C is the root cluster of a top tree RC and has children A
    and B. Deletes C, thus turning RC into the two top trees RA and RB .
    Finally, the root clusters of RA and RB are returned.

                                       5
destroy(e): eliminates the top tree consisting of edge e.

2.1    Discipline for modifying top trees
Top tree modifications have to be applied in the following order:

  1. First, top-down, we perform a sequence of splits.

  2. Then we destroy the clusters of some edges.

  3. Then we update the forest.

  4. Then we creates clusters of some edges.

  5. Finally, with joins, we recreate the top tree bottom-up.

The above order implies that when we do a split or join, we know that all
parts of the underlying forest is partitioned into base clusters.
    It is an important rule that a forest update may not change any current
cluster. Here, a cluster is changed by a forest update if the update changes
its set of edges or its set of boundary vertices. To appreciate the latter,
consider an update expose(v). This update only changes clusters with v an
interior vertex. A cluster in which v is already a boundary vertex is not
changed. Satisfying the rule means that when we get to the update in step
3, the previous steps 1–2 should have eliminated all clusters that would be
changed by the update.
    It is often natural to perform a composite sequence of updates in step
3. For example, if dealing with a spanning tree T , we might want
to swap one tree edge (v1 , w1) with another edge (v2 , w2 ). If we do
hcut((v1 , w1)); link((v2 , w2 )i as a composite update rather than as two sep-
arate updates, we avoid dealing with a temporary forest when we do the top
tree modifications in steps 1–2 and 4–5.
    In this paper, we are going to show the following result:

Theorem 1 For a dynamic forest we can maintain top trees of height
O(log n) supporting each link, cut, or expose with a sequence of O(1) create
and destroy, and O(log n) join and split. These top tree modifications are
identified in O(log n) time. The space usage of the top trees is linear in the
size of the dynamic forest. For a composite sequence of k updates, each of
the above bounds are multiplied by k.

                                      6
The proof of Theorem 1 is deferred to § 6. Until then, the focus will be on
applications of top trees.

2.2    Top trees generalize balanced binary search trees
Put in perspective, our top trees are natural generalizations of standard bal-
anced binary trees over dynamic collections of lists that may be concatenated
and split. In the balanced binary trees, each node represents a segment of
a list, which in top terminology is just a special case of a cluster. Standard
implementations for balanced binary trees also ascertain that the height is
O(log n), and that each concatenation and split can be done by O(log n) local
modifications.

2.3    Top tree terminology
If a vertex in a cluster is not a boundary vertex, it is internal to that cluster.
If a cluster C has two boundary vertices a and b, we call C a path cluster
and a · · · b the cluster path of C, denoted π(C). If C has only one boundary
vertex a, C is called a point cluster and then π(C) = a. Note that if A is a
child cluster of C and A shares an edge with π(C), then π(A) ⊆ π(C), and
then we call A a path child of C. In terms of boundary vertices, if C has
children A and B, A is a path child of C if and only if |∂C| = 2 and either
∂A = ∂C (Fig. 1 (2)) or ∂C ⊂ ∂A ∪ ∂B (Fig. 1 (1)).

2.4    Representation and usage of top trees
A top tree is represented as a standard binary rooted tree with parent and
children pointers. The nodes used to represent the top tree are denoted top
nodes. The top nodes of the binary tree represent the clusters, and with
each top node is associated the set of at most two boundary vertices of
the represented cluster. With a top leaf we store the corresponding edge.
With an internal top node is stored how it is decomposed into its children
(c.f. Fig. 1). Thus, considering the information descending from a top node,
we can construct the cluster it represents. Finally, from each vertex v, there
is a pointer to the smallest cluster C(v) that v is internal to, or to the root
cluster containing v if v is an external boundary vertex.
    Following parent pointers from C(v), we can find the root, top root(v),
of the top tree over the underlying tree T containing v. In the case of a

                                        7
forest, two vertices v and w are in the same underlying tree if and only
if top root(v) = top root(w). With top trees of logarithmic height as in
Theorem 1, we identify top root(v) in O(log n) time.
    An application of the top tree data structure, such as maintaining di-
ameters, centers, or medians, has direct access to the above representation,
and will typically associate some extra information with the top nodes. The
application employs an implementation of top trees, which is an algorithm
like the one described in Theorem 1, converting each link, cut, or expose
into a sequence of splits and joins on the top trees. In connection with each
join and split the application is notified and given pointers to the top nodes
representing the involved clusters. The application can then update its in-
formation associated with these top nodes. We note that a top tree may
only be modified with split and join. This discipline is important if we have
several applications running over the same top trees, each maintaining its
own information as splits and joins are performed. Typically, link and cut
are operations imposed from the outside whereas expose typically is used
internally by an application.

2.5    Concrete applications
As a first example, we can now easily derive a main result from [30].

Theorem 2 (Sleator and Tarjan) We can maintain a dynamic collection
of weighted trees in O(log n) time per link and cut, supporting queries about
the maximum weight between any two vertices in O(log n) time.

Proof: For this application, with each (top node representing a) cluster C,
we store as extra information the maximum weight max weight(C) on the
cluster path π(C). For a point-cluster C, max weight(C) = −∞. If a path
cluster consists of a single edge e, max weight(e) is just the weight of the
edge. When a path cluster C is created by a join, max weight(C) is the
maximum weight stored at its path children. When C is split or destroyed,
we just discard the information stored with C. Now, to find the maximum
weight between v and w, we set C := expose(v, w). Then π(C) = v · · · w,
and we return max weight(C). Since join and split are supported in constant
time, the Theorem now follows from Theorem 1.




                                      8
   In the above example, split is trivial. To see the relevance of split, we
consider an extension from [30].
Theorem 3 (Sleator and Tarjan) In Theorem 2, we can also add a com-
mon weight x to all edges on a given path v · · · w in O(log n) time.

Proof: For this extension, for each cluster C, we introduce a “lazy” weight
extra(C) which is to be added to all edges in π(C) in all clusters properly
descending from C. We note that if C is a root cluster, max weight(C) is
not affected by these extra-values, so max weight(C) is the correct maximal
weight on π(C). In particular, we can still find the maximal weight between
v and w as max weight(expose(v, w)).
   The addition of x to v · · · w is now done by calling C := expose(v, w)
and adding x to max weight(C) and to extra(C). Then split(C) requires
that for each path child A of C, we set max weight(A) := max weight(A) +
extra(C) and extra(A) := extra(A) + extra(C). For C := join(A, B), we set
max weight(C) := max {max weight(A), max weight(B)} and extra(C) :=
0. Finally, to find the maximum weight on the path v · · · w, we set C :=
expose(v, w) and return max weight(C).

   We will now go beyond [30] with a further extension needed in [33].
Theorem 4 In Theorem 3, we can also ask for the maximum weight of the
underlying tree containing a vertex v in O(log n) time.

Proof: Elaborating on the information from the previous two proofs,
for each cluster C, we will maintain a variable max non path(C) de-
noting the maximal weight on an edge in C which is not on the clus-
ter path. Assuming this variable, we can find the maximal weight of
the underlying tree containing v, setting C := top root(v) and returning
max{max non path(C), max weight(C)}.
    We maintain the max non path variables as follows. When the cluster of
an edge e is created, if e has two boundary vertices, we set max non path(e) =
−∞. Otherwise, max non path(e) is set to the weight of e. When a
cluster is joined as C := join(A, B), we first set max non path(C) :=
max{max non path(A), max non path(B)}. If C is not a path cluster but
one of its children, say A, is a path cluster (c.f. Fig. 1(3)), then we further have
consider weights from the cluster path of A, setting max non path(C) :=

                                         9
max{max non path(C), max weight(A)}. We note here that because A was
a root cluster, max weight(A) has its correct value, not missing any extra-
values from at ascending clusters. When clusters are split or destroyed, this
has no impact on the max non path-variables.

   In the rest of this paper, we are more interested in distances than in
maximum weights. Modifying the proof of Theorem 2, for each cluster C,
we will maintain the length length(C) of the cluster path. The length is
maintained as the maximum weight except that if C is created by a join,
length(C) is the sum of lengths stored with its path children. Thus we have
Lemma 5 In top trees, for each cluster C, we can maintain the length,
denoted length(C), of the cluster path in constant time per local top update,
hence in O(log n) time per link or cut. Then the distance between two vertices
v and w can be found in O(log n) time as length(expose(v, w)).
    As an interesting new application of top trees, we get the claimed result
for dynamic diameters.
Theorem 6 We can maintain a dynamic collection of weighted trees in
O(log n) time per link and cut, supporting queries about the diameter of the
tree containing any vertex in O(log n) time.

Proof: For each cluster C, we store its diameter diam(C). Moreover,
for each of its boundary vertices a ∈ ∂C, we store the maximal distance
max dist(C, a) from a to any vertex in C. Finally, we maintain the clus-
ter length from Lemma 5. The variables max dist and length are auxiliary
fields, needed for a fast join. Such carefully chosen extra information is often
crucial in top tree applications.
    When the cluster of an edge e is created, diam(e) = weight(e), and for
each boundary vertex v of e, max dist(e, v) = weight(e). Now, suppose
C := join(A, B), and that c is the common boundary vertex of A and B.
Then we set
  diam(C) := max {diam(A), diam(B), max dist(A, c) + max dist(B, c)}
Now consider any boundary vertex a of C. By symmetry, we may assume
that if a is not in one of A and B, it is not in B. Let c be the intersection
vertex of A and B. Then, if c 6= a,
   max dist(C, a) = max {max dist(A, a), length(A) + max dist(B, c)}

                                      10
If c = a then

          max dist(C, c) = max {max dist(A, c), max dist(B, c)}

Thus, create and join are implemented in constant time. As in the proof of
Theorem 2, split and destroy do not require any action. Hence Theorem 1
implies that we can maintain the above information in O(log n) time per link
or cut. To answer a diameter query for a vertex v, we set C := expose(v) and
return diam(C).

   Another illustrative application is the maintenance of nearest marked
neighbors.

Theorem 7 We can maintain a dynamic collection of trees in O(log n) time
per link and cut, or marking and unmarking of a vertex, supporting queries
about the (distance to) the nearest marked vertex of any given vertex in
O(log n) time.

Proof: Below, we just focus on finding the distance to the nearest marked
vertex. This is easily extended to also providing the vertex.
    For each boundary vertex a of a cluster C, we maintain the distance
mark dist(C, a) from a to the nearest marked vertex in C \ ∂C. The reason
that why exclude the boundary of C from consideration is that a vertex v may
appear as boundary vertex of Ω(n) clusters, and all these would be affected, if
v was (un)marked. From mark dist(C, a) we can easily compute the distance
mark dist∗ (C, a) from a to the nearest marked vertex in C excluding only
boundary vertices different from a. Then mark dist∗ (C, a) = 0 if a is marked,
and mark dist∗ (C, a) = mark dist(C, a) if a is unmarked. We also maintain
the cluster path length, length(C), as in Lemma 5.
    Given a vertex u, to find the distance to the nearest marked vertex, we
simply set C := expose(u), and return mark dist∗ (C, u).
    To (un)mark a vertex v, we first expose v. As an external boundary
vertex, v has no impact on any mark dist-value, so we can freely (un)mark
it.
    Suppose the cluster C is created as an edge (v, w). Then mark dist(C, v)
is the weight of (v, w) if w is marked and not in the boundary; otherwise, we
it to infinity.


                                      11
   Finally, consider C := join(A, B) with {c} = A ∩ B. Let a be a boundary
vertex of C. By symmetry, we can assume that a is in A. We now have
mark dist(C, a) =

 min{mark dist(A, a), mark distB, a)}                   if a = c
   min{mark dist(A, a), length(A) + mark dist(B, c)} if a 6= c and c ∈ ∂C
   min{mark dist(A, a), length(A) + mark dist∗ (B, c)} if a 6= c and c 6∈ ∂C


Thus, we can support both join and create in constant time, and split and
destroy do not require any action. By Theorem 1, this completes the proof
of Theorem 7


Corollary 8 For any positive integer parameter k, in a fixed undirected
graph on n vertices and m edges, in O(kmn1/k log n) expected time we can
build an O(kn1+1/k ) space data structure, supporting (un)marking of vertices
and queries about stretch 2k − 1 distances to a nearest marked vertex. Here
stretch 2k − 1 means that the reported distance may be up to a factor 2k − 1
too long. Both queries and updates take O(kn1/k log n) time.

Proof: In [34], it is shown how to generate a cover of edge-induced trees
within the above preprocessing bounds so that each vertex v is in O(kn1/k )
trees, and if the distance from v to w is d, there is a tree in which the distance
is at most (2k − 1)d. Now, if a vertex is marked, it is marked in all the trees
containing it, and to find a stretch 2k −1 distance to a nearest marked vertex,
we find the shortest distance to a marked vertex over all the trees.

    The above corollary is interesting because it in [18] is shown that sev-
eral combinatorial optimization problems can be approximated efficiently on
metrics with dynamic nearest neighbor. For example, in the bottle-neck
matching problem, where we wish to minimize the furthest distance between
a pair in the matching, we now get a 4k − 2 approximation in Õ(mn1/k )
expected time. An exact solution currently requires Õ(mn + n2.5 ) time [12].


3     Non-Local searching
We are now going to build a black box on top of our top trees for maintenance
of centers and medians. As discussed in the introduction, the common feature

                                       12
of centers and medians is that they represent non-local properties. Here a
vertex/edge property is local if it being satisfied by a vertex/edge in a tree
implies that the vertex/edge satisfies the property in all subtrees containing
it. For example, being the minimum edge on a given path is a local property.
Local properties lend themselves nicely to bottom-up computations whereas
non-local properties appear to be more challenging.
    For our general non-local searching, the application should supply a func-
tion select that given the root cluster of a top tree, selects one of the two
children. Recall here that a root cluster represents the whole underlying tree,
which is important when dealing with non-local properties. Our black box
will use select to guide a binary search after a desired edge. More precisely,
the first time select is called, it is just given the root of an original top tree
R. It then selects one of the two children. In subsequent iterations, there
will be some cluster C in the original top tree which is the intersection of all
clusters selected so far. If C has children A and B, the black box modifies
the top tree so that A and B are subsumed by different children A∗ and B ∗
of the root. Then select is called on the root C ∗ = join(A∗ , B ∗ ). If A∗ is
selected, A is the new intersection of all selected clusters. Likewise, if B ∗ is
selected, B is the new intersection of all selected clusters. This way, select
is used to guide a binary search down through the original top tree R. The
formal statement of the result is as follows.
Theorem 9 (Non-Local Search) Starting with the root cluster of a top
tree of height h and at most one external boundary vertex, after O(h) calls to
select, join, and split, there is a unique edge (v, w) contained in all clusters
chosen by select, and then (v, w) is returned. Subsequently, the top tree is
returned to its previous state with O(h) calls to join, and split.
    If there are two external boundary vertices x and y, the above selection
process will stop with a unique (v, w) edge on the path from x to y.
As stipulated in the general interface to top trees, the implementation behind
Theorem 9 will only manipulate the top tree with join and split operations. In
our applications, we will apply Theorem 9 to a top tree from Theorem 1 with
height h = O(log n). Then the number of calls to join and split in Theorem 9
is O(h) = O(log n).
    Theorem 9 will not be proved till § 3.4. Before that we demonstrate appli-
cations of Theorem 9 in the dynamic center, median, and ancestor problems.
In these applications, our general approach is to first decide the information
needed for select, second show how to make the information available. The

                                       13
external boundary vertices will only play a role in the ancestor application
in §3.3.

3.1    Dynamic center
For any tree T and vertex v let max dist(T, v) denote the maximal distance
from v in T . A center is a vertex v minimizing max dist(T, v).
Lemma 10 Let T be a tree, and let A and B be neighboring clusters with
A∩B = {c} and A∪B = T . If max dist(A, c) ≥ max dist(B, c), A contains
all centers.

Proof: Let w be a vertex in A of maximal distance to c. Then
dist(c, w) = max dist(A, c) = max dist(T, c). Now, for any v ∈ B \
A, max dist(T, v) ≥ dist(v, w) = dist(v, c) + dist(c, w) = dist(v, c) +
max dist(T, c). Since the edge weights are positive, dist(v, c) > 0, thus
max dist(T, v) > max dist(T, c) and v cannot be a center.

    In the dynamic center problem, we maintain a forest under link and
cut interspersed with queries center(u) requesting the center of the current
tree containing the vertex u. We use the top trees from Theorem 1. For
each boundary vertex a of a cluster C, we maintain the maximal distance
max dist(C, a) from a in C as described in the proof of Theorem 6. Then
link and cut take O(log n) time.
    To find center(u), we first set D := expose(u) so that D becomes the
current root cluster over the tree containing u. The non-local search of
Theorem 9 will start in D, but we need to define select given an arbitrary
root cluster C with children A and B, A ∩ B = {c}. If max dist(A, c) ≥
max dist(B, c), select picks A, otherwise it picks B. By Lemma 10, any
cluster picked contains all centers, so, following Theorem 9, the returned
edge (v, w) contains all centers. Moreover, select takes constant time, so
(v, w) is found in O(log n) time. To find out if v or w is a center, we compute
D := expose(v, w) in O(log n) time. Since D coincides with T , we can return
v if max dist(D, v) < max dist(D, w); w otherwise. Hence we can answer
center(u) in O(log n) time. Thus we conclude
Theorem 11 The center can be maintained dynamically under link, cut and
center(u) queries in O(log n) worst case time per operation.

                                      14
3.2    Dynamic median
Let T be a treePwith positive vertex and edge weights. A median is a vertex
m minimizing v∈V (weight(v) × dist(v, m)) where dist(v, m) is the distance
from v to m in the tree. For any tree T , let vert weight(T ) denote the sum
of the vertex weights of T . Our approach to finding medians is similar to
that for centers, but for the median, it is natural to allow the application to
change vertex weights, and this requires a simple trick.
    The simple lemma below is implicit in Goldman [20].
Lemma 12 Let (v, w) be an edge in the weighted tree T , and let Tv
and Tw be the trees from T \ {(v, w)} containing v and w, respectively.
If vert weight(Tv ) = vert weight(Tw ), v and w are the only medians in T ,
and if vert weight(Tv ) > vert weight(Tw ), all medians in T are in Tv .
Corollary 13 Let T be a tree, and let A and B be neighboring clusters with
A∩B = {c} and A∪B = T . Then vert weight(A) ≥ vert weight(B) implies
that A contains a median of T .

Proof: Assume that vert weight(A) ≥ vert weight(B). If there exists
an edge (c, w) in B such that vert weight(Tc ) = vert weight(Tw ), then
by Lemma 12, c and w are (the only) medians in T and since c is in
A we are done. Otherwise for any edge (c, w) in B, vert weight(Tc ) 6=
vert weight(Tw ). By assumption, vert weight(Tc ) ≥ vert weight(A) ≥
vert weight(B) ≥ vert weight(Tw ), and thus vert weight(Tc ) >
vert weight(Tw ). Then Lemma 12 states that all medians of T are in Tc ,
and since this is true for any edge (c, w), there must be a median in A.

    The above corollary suggests that we should maintain the vertex weight
of each cluster, but this gives rise to a problem; namely that a single vertex
can be contained in arbitrarily many clusters, and a change in its weight
would affect all these clusters. Recall that we faced a very similar problem
for the mark dist-values in the proof of Theorem 7, and again we will resort
to ignoring the boundary.
    For each cluster C, we only maintain their “internal weight”
int weight(C) = vert weight(C \ ∂C). We can still derive the real weight
vert weight(C) as int weight(C) + weight(∂C) in constant time.
    To join two clusters A and B, A ∩ B = {c} into C, we add their internal
weights plus the weight of c if c 6∈ ∂C. To change the weight of a vertex v,

                                      15
we first call expose(v). Then v is not internal to any cluster, and hence no
cluster information has to be updated when we change the weight of v.
    We can now implement select as suggested by Corollary 13, choosing the
child cluster minimizing vert weight in constant time. Thus we get an edge
(v, w) which contains all medians in O(log n) time.
    To find a median among v and w, we apply Lemma 12. We cut the edge
(v, w), and return v if the (root cluster of the) tree Tv containing v is heavier;
otherwise we return w. Before returning v or w, we link (v, w) back in T .
The link and cut take O(log n) time, so we conclude:

Theorem 14 The median can be maintained dynamically under link, cut
and change of vertex weights in O(log n) worst case time per operation.

3.3    Nearest common ancestors and level ancestors
We will now show how to implement nearest common ancestors and level
ancestors with respect to arbitrary roots. In the context of unrooted trees,
this is done via the two functions jump(x, y, d), returning the vertex d hops
from x on the path from x to y, and meet(x, y, z) returning the intersection
point between the three paths connecting x, y, and z. With root r, the level
ℓ ancestor of v is jump(r, v, ℓ), and the nearest common ancestor of u and v
is meet(u, v, r).
    To implement jump and meet, from Lemma 5 we will use the cluster
path length length(·) as well as the general distances between vertices. To
implement jump(x, y, d) we first expose x and y. We now implement select
as follows. Let A and B be the children of the root cluster C with x ∈ A and
y ∈ B. If length(A) ≤ d, we select A; otherwise we select B. At the end, we
get an edge, and then we return the end-point whose distance to x is d.
    Having implemented jump,              we compute meet(x, y, z) as
jump(z, x, (dist(x, z) + dist(y, z) − dist(x, y))/2).     Thus we conclude


Theorem 15 We can maintain a dynamic collection of weighted trees in
O(log n) time per link and cut, supporting jump and meet queries in O(log n)
time.




                                       16
3.4     Non-Local search implementation
We will now first prove Theorem 9 when there are no boundary vertices. First
we will assume that there are no external boundary vertices. Essentially our
search will follow a path down the given top tree R. As we search down, we
will modify the top tree so as to facilitate calls to select, but we will end up
restoring it in its original form. All modifications for the search are done via
split and join, as stipulated in the general interface to top trees.
     Our search consists of O(log n) iterations i = 0, .... At the beginning of
iteration i, there will be a “current” cluster Ci on depth i in the original top
tree R which contains exactly the edges that have been in all clusters selected
so far. Thus C0 is the original root cluster representing an underlying tree T .
If Ci is a single edge (v, w), we return (v, w). Otherwise Ci has children Ai
and Bi in the original top tree. Then select will be presented a root cluster
joining A∗i and Bi∗ such that Ai ⊆ A∗i , Bi ⊆ Bi∗ , and T = A∗i ∪ Bi∗ . That
is, the application-defined select will be called as select(join(A∗i , Bi∗ )). If the
application selects A∗i , we have Ci+1 = Ai for the next iteration. Otherwise
Ci+1 = Bi .
     At the beginning of iteration i, we have Ci the root of a top tree which
was the subtree of the original top tree R descending from Ci . Besides, for
each boundary vertex a of Ci , we have an “outside” root cluster Xa with
everything from the underlying tree T that is separated from Ci by a. Also,
Xa includes a. Together with Ci , the outside root clusters Xa partition the
edges of T . For C0 = T , we do not have any outside root clusters.
     We are done when Ci is a top leaf consisting of a single edge. Otherwise,
we split Ci into two children Ai and Bi .
     To create A∗i , we take all outside root clusters intersecting Ai and join
them with Ai . If an outside root cluster does not intersect Ai , it intersects
Bi , and is joined with Bi to create Bi∗ . We then call the application-defined
select on join(A∗i , Bi∗ ).
     We now split all the newly joined clusters so that the root clusters become
Ai , Bi , and the outside root cluster for each boundary vertex of Ci from the
beginning of the iteration. By symmetry, we may assume that select picked
Ai . We then set Ci+1 := Ai , and we join Bi with all outside root clusters
intersecting Bi in a new maximal outside root cluster. Finally, we recurse on
Ci+1 .
     As mentioned, the iterations stop as soon as we arrive at a Ci which is just
a single edge (v, w). Since each iteration only involves a constant number of


                                         17
joins and splits, we conclude that the total number of joins and splits is O(h)
where h is the initial height of the top tree. In the end when we have found
Ci = (v, w), we just reverse all joins and splits to restore the top tree in its
original form, and return the edge (v, w).
    With a minor modification, the above construction also works in the
presence of a single external boundary vertex. The modification is in the case
where a boundary vertex a of Ci is the external boundary vertex and where
a does not separate Ci from any part of the underlying tree. In that case no
outside cluster Xa is associated with a. This completes our implementation
of Theorem 9 when there are less than two external boundary vertices.

3.5    Two external boundary vertices
The non-local search described above works fine with less than two boundary
vertices. However, when we have two external boundary vertices x and y
in the underlying tree T , the goal of the non-local search is to select an
edge on x · · · y = π(T ). In the above selection process, this means that
the currently selected cluster Ci should always have an edge e from x · · · y.
Then e ∈ π(Ci ) ⊆ π(T ). Thus it follows that if a child of Ci is not a path
child, then that child cannot be selected. In that case, the only path child is
automatically made the next current cluster Ci+1 . The process stops when
π(Ci ) consists of a single edge, which is then returned.
    In the actual implementation, since Ci has an edge in its cluster path,
Ci has two distinct boundary vertices a and b with disjoint outside root
clusters Xa and Xb . Each of these outside root clusters contain one of the
two external boundary vertices. Let Ai and Bi be the children of Ci with
a ∈ Ai and b ∈ Bi . If Ai is not a path child, we simply set Xa = join(Xa , Ai )
and Ci+1 = Bi . Similarly, if Bi is not a path child, we set Xb = join(Xb , Bi )
and Ci+1 = Ai . It is only if both Ai and Bi are path children that we call
the application-defined select on join(A∗i , Bi∗ ) where A∗i = join(Xa , Ai ) and
Bi∗ = join(Xb , Bi ).
    We note that with two external boundary vertices x and y, it is necessary
that we restrict select to pick edges from x · · · y as above. Otherwise, above
we could end up with Ai and Bi intersecting in a vertex c outside x · · · y.
Since A∗i and Bi∗ intersect in c and partition the underlying tree, one of them
would contain both x and y, hence have three boundary vertices x, y, and c.
    This completes our implementation of Theorem 9.


                                       18
4     Methodological remarks
Our results on diameters, centers, and medians could also have been achieved
based on either Sleator and Tarjan’s dynamic trees [30], or Frederickson’s
topology trees [13, 14]. However, we claim that the derivation from these
more classical data structures would have been more technical.

4.1    Frederickson’s topology trees
Top trees are very similar to Frederickson’s topology trees [13, 14], from
which they are derived. The essential difference is that the clusters of topol-
ogy trees are not connected via vertices, but via edges. Since Frederickson’s
boundary consists of edges, he cannot limit the boundaries for unlimited
degree trees. Thus, in applications for unbounded degrees one has to code
these with ternary trees, inserting some extra edges and vertices that typi-
cally require special handling. Even if we assume we are dealing with ternary
trees, topology trees still have clusters with up to three boundary edges in-
stead of just two boundary vertices. Also topology join combines two clusters
plus the edge between them whereas a top join just unites two neighboring
clusters. Neither of these issues lead to fundamental difficulties, but, in our
experience, they lead to significantly more cases.
    We note that Frederickson [15] has already shown how Sleator and Tar-
jan’s [30] axiomatic interface to dynamic trees can be implemented with
topology trees. Our corresponding implementation with top trees from § 2
is inspired by that of Frederickson.

4.2    Sleator and Tarjan’s dynamic trees
Sleator and Tarjan provide an axiomatic interface for their dynamic trees [30]
where an application can choose a root with a so-called evert operation, and
then, for any specific vertex, add weights to all edges on the path to the
root, or ask for the minimum of all weights on this path. This is basically
the interface we implemented with top trees at the end of § 2, assuming that
we expose both the desired root and the specified vertex.
   Before discussing limitations to the above interface, we first illustrate its
generality by viewing the min-query as representing an arbitrary associative
operator ⊕. For example, suppose as in [30] that we want to implement
parent pointers to the current root. We then let the weight of an edge be

                                      19
its pair of end-points and define a ⊕ b = a. Then the “min”-query returns
the end-points of the first edge on the path to the root, from which we
immediately get a parent pointer. Similarly, adding x to all weights on a
path could be done with any associative operator ⊗ that distribute over ⊕,
that is, x ⊗ (y ⊕ z) = (x ⊗ y) ⊕ (x ⊗ z). Instead of having (⊕, ⊗) = (min, +),
we could have e.g. (⊕, ⊗) = (+, ×).
    Despite these generalizations, the axiomatic interface is still centered
around paths, and it has been found too limited for many applications of
dynamic trees. Instead authors have had to work directly with Sleator and
Tarjan’s underlying representation [35, 6, 24, 27, 28, 17, 5, 23, 19, 9, 8, 10, 26].
In particular, this is the case for the previous solutions to the dynamic cen-
ter [7] and median problems [3], and we believe part of the reason for their
worse bounds and more complex solutions is difficulties in working directly
with Sleator and Tarjan’s underlying representation.
    Of course, one may try to increase the applicability of the axiomatic
interface by augmenting it with further operations. For example, [29] shows
how to find a minimum weight vertex in a subtree. However, dealing with
non-local properties is not so immediate, and we find it unlikely that we
will ever converge to a set of operations so big that we can forget about the
underlying representation.
    For contrast, with top or topology trees it is easy to deal directly with
the representation. For example, to compute the minimum vertex of a given
subtree as in [29]; since we can insert and delete edges, this is equivalent
to maintaining the minimum vertex of each tree in a dynamic forest. With
top trees this is done by maintaining, for each cluster, the minimum weight
over its non-boundary vertices. Since each vertex is only non-boundary in
O(log n) clusters, weight changes of vertices are trivially supported. If we
do not expose any external boundary vertices, the root cluster will store the
desired minimum.

4.3    Henzinger and King’s ET-trees
For completeness, we also mention Henzinger and King’s ET-trees [21]. This
is a standard binary trees over the Euler tour of a tree. This technique
is much simpler to implement than those mentioned above, and it can be
used whenever we are interested in maintaining a minimum over the edges or
vertices of a tree, where the minimum may be interpreted as any associative
and commutative operation. Thus, the above mentioned result from [29] on

                                        20
maintaining the minimum weight vertex of a tree is immediate, and in fact,
this was pointed out before [29] in [32]. However, the ET-trees cannot be
used to maintain any of the path information discussed so far. Also, they
cannot be used to maintain medians and centers.


5     Generalizations of top trees
In the following, to avoid confusion with leaves in the underlying trees, we
refer to the leaves of a top tree as base clusters. At present the base clusters
are just the edges of the underlying tree, but it is sometimes important to deal
with fewer but larger base clusters. For example, this is needed in classical
topology tree applications such as maintaining the minimum spanning tree of
a fully-dynamic graph [13]. Also, it is needed for a recent application of top
trees maintaining minimum cuts [33]. For these applications, we allow the
user to distribute labels on the vertices of the underlying tree. These labels
represent application-specific information associated with the vertices. For
example, if we are maintaining a minimum spanning tree, the labels represent
incident ends of non-tree edges.
    We note that Frederickson’s topology trees [13, 14] do not support labels.
His underlying trees have to be ternary so each application has to decide how
to code high degree vertices and other information in ternary trees.
    Thus our top trees are now dealing with a labeled tree T . Each label
is attached to a unique vertex, but the same vertex may have many labels
attached. In many regards, the labels can be thought of as edges with a
single end-point.
    In a subtree U of a labeled tree T , each vertex may have attached any
subset of its labels in T . We extend the notion of boundary vertices to include
vertices in U that have fewer labels attached in U than in T . That is, ∂U is
now the set of vertices in U that are either external boundary vertices of T
or vertices with an incident edge or attached label that is included in T but
not in U.
    A cluster U of T is a subtree with at most two boundary vertices con-
taining at least an edge or a label. Thus, we now accept a single vertex as a
cluster if it has an associated label in the cluster. Two clusters are neighbors
if their intersection is a single vertex. They cannot have any labels or edges
in common. It follows that the base clusters of a top tree form a partitioning
of the edges and labels of the underlying tree. Similarly, it follows that labels,


                                       21
like edges, appear in exactly one cluster on each level in a top tree.
    One conceptual advantage to labels is that any cluster can be be reduced
to an edge or a label. More precisely, we get a new labeled tree if we replace
a point cluster with a label at its boundary vertex, or if we replace a path
cluster with an edge between its boundary vertices.
    A simple application of labels would be to attach a label [v] to a vertex
v. On each level of a top tree, the label [v] will only appear once whereas
the vertex v can participate in arbitrarily many clusters. This way, [v] can
be used as a distinguished representative for v in a top tree.
    In addition to the original link, cut, and expose operations, we have the
two new operations:
attach(v, a): attaches a label a to the vertex v.
detach(a): detaches the label a from whatever vertex it was attached to.
To get the full power of the generalized top trees, we allow top nodes C with
a single child D, created by C := join(D). Then C and D represent exactly
the same cluster. We can then get leveled top trees where all base clusters
are on level 0, and where the parent of a level i top node is on level i + 1.
We define the size of a cluster or labeled tree to be the total number of its
edges and labels. We now have the following generalization of Theorem 1:
Theorem 16 Consider a fully-dynamic forest and let Q be a positive integer
parameter. For the trees in the forest, we can maintain a leveled top trees
whose base clusters are of size at most Q and such that if a tree has size s, it
has height h = O(log s) and ⌈O(s/(Q(1 + ε)i ))⌉ clusters on level i ≤ h. Here
ε is a positive constant. Each link, cut, attach, detach, or expose operation is
supported with O(1) creates and destroys, and O(1) joins and splits on each
positive level. If the involved trees have total size s, this involves O(log s)
top tree modifications, all of which are identified in O(Q + log s) time. For a
composite sequence of k updates, each of the above bounds are multiplied by
k. As a variant, if we have parameter S bounding the size of each underlying
tree, then we can choose to let all top roots be on the same level H = O(log S).
We note that Theorem 16 implies Theorem 1. More precisely, to get Theo-
rem 1 from Theorem 16, we set Q = 1, use no labels, and skip all top nodes
that are single children.
    To appreciate Theorem 16, we briefly sketch Frederickson’s algorithm for
maintaining a minimum spanning tree of a fully-dynamic graph [13], but
using top trees instead of topology trees.

                                      22
Theorem 17 (Frederickson) We can maintain
                                        √     a minimum spanning tree
of a fully dynamic connected graph in O( m) time per edge insertion or
deletion1.

Proof: If an edge (v, w) is inserted in the graph, it should be added to the
minimum spanning tree T if it is lighter than the maximum weight on the
path from v to w in T . From Theorem 2, we already know how to support
such path queries in O(log n) time.
    Our challenge is to deal with the deletion of a tree edge. Our task is to
find a lightest replacement
                  √          edge reconnecting the tree, and we will show how
to do this in O( m) time.
    We will employ leveled top trees R from Theorem 16 where the labels
attached to a vertex are ends of incident non-tree edges. More precisely,
for each non-tree edge (v, w), we have a label [v, w] attached to v and a
symmetric label [w, v] attached w. These two labels are always attached or
detached as a composite update (c.f. §2.1) so that we never have one but
not the other present in our top trees. The total size of our labeled forest is
then the number m of edges in the graph.
    We will use the variant of top trees in the end of Theorem 16 with S an
upper bound on the total size m. Using standard back-ground rebuilding,
we can ensure S = Θ(m). More precisely, we can divide updates into epochs
that first initiate new top trees R′ with this S ′ = 2m instead of the current
S. During the next S/4 updates we copy the current data from R to R′ , and
switch to R′ when done.                                           √          √
    Now that S is fixed for the current top tree R, we set Q = S = Θ( m).
Since we have at most two trees at any time, the number of√clusters on level
i ≤ H = O(log S) = O(log m) is ⌈O(S/(Q(1 + ε)i ))⌉ = ⌈O( m/(1 + ε)i )⌉.
    For each pair (C, D) of clusters on the same level, we will store the lightest
non-tree edge lightest(C, D) between them. Here (v, w) goes between C
and D if [v, w] is a label in C and [w, v] is a label in D, or vice     √ versa.
Assuming that the clusters are enumerated with numbers up to O( S), we
can implement lightest as a simple two dimensional array over all cluster
pairs. We can just ignoring entries with cluster pairs on different levels. Also,
since lightest is symmetric, we identify lightest(C, D) with lightest(D, C).
    Assuming that the array leightest is properly maintained, if a tree edge
  1                                                                          √
    We
     √ note that for denser graphs, Eppstein et al. [11] have improved the O( m) bound
to O( n) using their general sparsification technique.


                                         23
(v, w) is deleted, we cut it, and then the desired minimum replacement edge
is the minimum edge between the root clusters. More precisely, we perform
the following sequence of operations:

    cut((v, w)); C := top root(v); D := top root(w); (x, y) := lightest(C, D);
    hdetach([x, y]); detach([y, x]); i link((x, y));

We now have to show how to √       maintain leightest. Suppose a base cluster B
is created. Since it has only m incident non-tree edges, each going to a
base√ cluster on the same level, we √  can easily find lightest(B, D) for all the
O( m) base clusters D ∈ R in O( m) time.                               √
     Now suppose a level i > 0 cluster C is joined. For each of the ⌈O( m/(1+
ε)i )⌉ other level i clusters D ∈ R, we set lightest(C, D) to be the lightest
of lightest(A, B) where A is a child of C and B is a child of D. Thus we
compute lightest(C, D) in constant time.
     Finally, we note that split and destroy require no action. It follows from
Theorem 16 that each link, cut, expose, attach, or detach operation is sup-
ported in
                          O(log n)
                           X √                         √
                       O(         ⌈ m/(1 + ε)i ⌉) = O( m)
                          i=0

time, which is then also the time bound for finding a replacement edge.

    A much more involved application using the generalized top trees
from Theorem 16 is the fully-dynamic algorithm for maintaining minimum
cuts [33]. We note that [33] assumes Theorem 16 which is proved below in
this paper by reduction to Frederickson’s topology trees [14].


6     Implementing top trees
We will now first implement the top trees of Theorem 16 via Frederick-
son’s topology trees [14], and thereby establish Theorem 16 and Theorem 1.
Next, we implement the topology trees with Sleator and Tarjan’s st-trees [30].
The connection is interesting because topology trees and st-trees so far have
been implemented with very different techniques. A nice consequence is that
the simple amortized implementation of st-trees implies a simple amortized
implementation of topology trees, and of top trees. Previously, no simple

                                       24
amortized implementation of topology trees was known. We note that for a
practical implementation, one should not follow all our reductions rigorously,
but rather go for a more direct implementation. We hope to address these
practical issues in future work.

6.1     Implementing expose
As a very first step in our reduction, we note that if we first have an imple-
mentation of top trees without expose, then later, we can easily add expose.
The simple point is that in a top tree of height h, each vertex is included in
at most h clusters. To expose a and b, we simply split all the clusters having
them as non-boundary vertices. We now have a set of O(h) root clusters to
be joined into one cluster. Clearly, this can require at most O(h) joins, so
we do not need to worry about the height. First, as long as there is a point
cluster, we join it with an arbitrary neighbor. If a = b, this process ends
with a single point cluster, as desired. Otherwise, we end with a string of
path clusters C1 , ..., Ck with boundaries {c0 , c1 }, {c1 , c2 }, ..., {ck−1 , ck } where
c0 = a and ck = b. We can then repeatedly join neighbors in this string until
a single path cluster with boundary {a, b} remains. Before supporting any
new link or cut, we simply revert all the above joins and splits, restoring the
previous un-exposed top tree.
    Thus, in the remaining implementation, we may consider expose done,
and focus on maintaining top trees of height O(log n) under link and cut as
in Theorem 16 but without expose.

6.2     Top trees via topology trees
Theorem 16 without expose is proved in [14] in the context of topology trees
with their different definition of clusters. The topology clusters are subtrees
like top clusters, but in a topology tree, independent clusters are vertex-
disjoint. In particular, the topology base clusters are disjoint. They partition
the vertices and are connected via edges. The topology trees are only defined
for ternary trees. A cluster may have at most 3 edges leaving it, called
boundary edges, and if it has three edges leaving it, it may only consist of a
single vertex. The topology tree is binary like a top tree. A parent cluster is
the union of the two child clusters plus the edge connecting them.
    Now, implementing top trees with topology trees is easy. We ternarize
each vertex as follows: while there is a vertex v with degree > 3, we turn v into

                                           25
a path with the incident edges branching off. More precisely, if v is incident
to w0 , ...wd , d ≥ 3, we may replace v by a path v1 , ..., vd−1 with incident edges
(v1 , w0 ), (vi , wi ), i = 1, ..., d − 1, and (vd−1 , wd ). The edge (vi , wj ) remembers
that it originated from (v, wj ). In Frederickson’s topology trees the base
clusters are all disjoint. To represent labels associated with a vertex v, we
just add them to the above path representing v as extra vertices.
     To transform a topology tree into a top tree, we essentially just take each
topology cluster C and transform it into the top cluster C ′ induced by the
vertices, edges, and labels contained in C. We note that C ′ has at most two
boundary vertices. Clearly this is the case if C has at most two boundary
edges, but if C has three boundary edges, C consists of a single vertex, which
is hence the only boundary vertex. As an exception, if a topology cluster has
no labels or edges from the original tree, there is no corresponding top cluster
is considered empty and has no representative in the top tree.
     The base top clusters are those derived from the base topology clusters,
plus a base cluster for each edge not in a derived base cluster. Now, a
topology join in converts into two top joins, where first one of the topology
children join with the edge between them. Next the resulting top cluster
joins with the other topology child. Here a join with an empty top cluster
is just skipped. Since a topology join may requires two top joins, each level
in a topology tree translates into two levels in a top tree. Given the proofs
for topology trees in [14, pp. 486–497], we conclude that Theorem 1 and 16
hold true. The achievement with top trees is a simpler interface for high-
degree trees where the ternarization is not done by each application but by
the implementation via the above reduction. Also, the join has slightly fewer
cases and is slightly simpler because we do not have to incorporate an edge
between the clusters.

6.3     Topology trees via st-trees
We will now demonstrate how Sleator and Tarjan’s st-trees [30] can be used
to implement topology trees whose base clusters are the vertices. Together
with the previous reduction from top trees to topology trees, this provides
us with a very different implementation of Theorem 1. Here by st-trees, we
do not refer to the nice path-oriented axiomatic interface from [30], but to
the underlying implementation.
    First, we note that the st-trees are presented for rooted trees, but on the
other hand, they have an evert(v) operation, making v the root of its tree.

                                           26
Hence, to perform an arbitrary link(u, v), we can first evert(u), making it root
of its tree, and then link(u, v), making (u, v) a parent pointer.
    Since our starting point is an unrooted ternary tree, a rooted version of
it is a binary tree. An exception is the root, which in principle could be
have three children. However, this is easily avoided. First of all, we could
pick the root as a a leaf in the unrooted tree with degree one. Also, consider
the situation above where we want to link(u, v) and first make u the root
with evert(u). Since the result is ternary, u had degree at most two before
link(u, v), so u does not get three children. The link(u, v) operation is just
adding a parent pointer to u.
    Sleator and Tarjan define a set of disjoint solid paths down from a vertex
in T to a leaf providing a partitioning of the vertices. They then form an
st-tree T ′ as follows. They take each solid path P = (v1 , ..., vp ) with v1 closest
to the root and v0 the parent of v1 , and remove all parent pointers of the
vertices in the path. Then they make a binary tree P ′ with v1 , ..., vp as leaves
appearing in this order, and make v0 the parent of the root. If v1 was the
root of the whole tree, the root of P ′ becomes the root of T ′ , which in [30]
ends up with logarithmic height.
    Now each vertex v in T ′ represents the cluster C(v) induced by the vertices
from T descending from it in T ′ . To see that these are clusters we just note
that if v ∈ P ′ above, the descendants of v from P form a segment S of P .
The only edges incident to C(v) are then the parent pointer from the first
vertex in S and the children pointer from the last vertex in S to its child in
P , if any.
    We can now construct the topology tree as follows. The base clusters are
the vertices of T . The rest of the top tree is constructed by following T ′
bottom-up. When we meet a vertex v from T , it has only one child w in T ′ ,
which was its non-solid child in T . Then C(v) = join({v} , C(w)). When we
meet a vertex v ′ not from T , it has two children u and w in T ′ , and then
C(v ′ ) = join(C(u), C(w)).
    Thus we have established a mapping from the st-tree T ′ to a topology
tree R whose base clusters are the vertices. Since the st-tree has height
O(log n) so does the topology tree. Also, the main technical result from [30]
is that each link, cut, and evert, only affects O(log n) vertices in the st-trees,
including their parents, and hence this gets translated into O(log n) splits and
joins. Thus, we can derive Frederickson’s topology trees [14], and hence top
trees, from Sleator and Tarjan’s st-trees [30]. In particular this implies that
the simple amortized version of st-trees [31] provides a simple amortized

                                         27
version of top trees. When using the amortized version of top trees, there is
no guarantee of the height of the top tree. However, if we precede each query
with an expose we will meet the amortized bounds.
    The advantage of top trees and topology trees over st-trees is a nice,
easy to apply, interpretation of the system of solid paths replaced by binary
trees in st-trees. This point is illustrated with our top tree solutions to the
diameter, center, and median problems for dynamic trees, improving over
previous solutions based on st-trees [3, 7].


7    Concluding remarks
We have introduced top trees as a design of an interface providing users with
easier access to the power of previous techniques for maintaining information
in a fully-dynamic forest. Conceptually, top trees are very similar to Freder-
ickson’s topology trees [14], the subtle difference being that top clusters are
joined by vertices whereas topology trees are joined via edges. This small dif-
ference has the immediate advantage that top trees work directly for trees of
unbounded degrees, which with topology trees would first have to be coded
as ternary trees. It also makes joins of two clusters a bit simpler in that they
do not involve an intermediate edge.
    Using top trees, we dealt with a variety of different applications including
non-local search problems like maintaining the center or median of trees in a
dynamic forest. For these two problems, we provided quadratic improvements
over previous bounds. We also showed how top trees, in theory, could be
implemented both with Frederickson’s topology trees [14], and with Sleator
and Tarjan’s st-trees [30].
    A main practical challenge is now to make a good library implementation
of top trees for use in different applications. We could have different imple-
mentations, e.g., a worst-case implementation based on the ideas in topology
trees [14], and a faster amortized implementation based on st-trees [30]. For
speed, the implementations should be tuned directly for top trees and not
just use our general reductions. Ideally, applications and implementations
should only communicate with each other via the top tree interface, so that
one can replace one implementation with another in a plug-and-play manner
without a change to the applications. It is not trivial to make such generic
interfaces efficient, but C++ solutions have been reported in by Austern et
al. [4] for the simpler case of balanced binary search trees. We do hope to


                                      28
address such practical library implementations of top trees in future work.


Acknowledgment
We would like to thank Renato Werneck for many very helpful comments to
an earlier version of this paper.


References
 [1] S. Alstrup, J. Holm, K. de Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup. Minimizing
     diameters of dynamic trees. In Proc. 24th ICALP, pages 270–280, 1997.
 [2] S. Alstrup, J. Holm, and M. Thorup. Maintaining center and median in
     dynamic trees. In Proc. 7th SWAT, LNCS 1851, pages 46–56, 2000.
 [3] V. Auletta, D. Parente, and G. Persiano. Dynamic and static algorithms
     for optimal placement of resources in a tree. Theor. Comp. Sc., 165:441–
     461, 1996.
 [4] M. Austern, B. Stroustrup, M. Thorup, and J. Wilkinson. Untangling
     the balancing and searching of balanced binary search trees. Software:
     Practice and Experience, 33(13):1273–1298, 2003.
 [5] G. Battista and R. Tamassia. Incremental planarity testing. In Proc.
     30th FOCS, pages 436–441, 1989.
 [6] G. Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line graph algorithms with SPQR-
     trees. In Proc. 17th ICALP, LNCS 443, pages 598–611, 1990.
 [7] S. Cheng and M. Ng. Isomorphism testing and display of symmetries in
     dynamic trees. In Proc. 7th SODA, pages 202–211, 1996.
 [8] R. Cohen and R. Tamassia. Dynamic expression trees. Algorithmica,
     13(3):245–265, 1995.
 [9] R. Cohen and R. Tamassia.       Combine and conquer.      Algorithmica,
     18(3):324–362, 1997.
[10] R. F. Cohen and R. Tamassia. Dynamic expression trees and their
     applications. In Proc. 2nd SODA, pages 52–61, 1991.

                                     29
[11] D. Eppstein, Z. Galil, G. F. Italiano, and A. Nissenzweig. Sparsification
     — a technique for speeding up dynamic graph algorithms. J. ACM,
     44(5):669–696, 1997.

[12] S. Even and O. Kariv. An o(n2.5 ) algorithm for maximum matching in
     general graphs. In Proc. 16th FOCS, pages 100–112, 1975.

[13] G. Frederickson. Data structures for on-line updating of minimum span-
     ning trees, with applications. SIAM J. Comp., 14(4):781–798, 1985.

[14] G. Frederickson. Ambivalent data structures for dynamic 2–edge–
     connectivity and k smallest spanning trees. SIAM J. Comp., 26(2):484–
     538, 1997. Announced at FOCS’91.

[15] G. Frederickson. A data structure for dynamically maintaining rooted
     trees. J. of Algorithms, 24(1):37–65, 1997. Announced at SODA’93.

[16] H. N. Gabow, H. Kaplan, and R. E. Tarjan. Unique maximum match-
     ing algorithms. J. Algorithms, 40(2):159–183, 2001. Announced at
     STOC’99.

[17] Z. Galil and G. Italiano. Maintaining biconnected components of dy-
     namic planar graphs. In Proc. 18th ICALP, LNCS 510, pages 339–350,
     1991.

[18] A. Goel, P. Indyk, and K. Varadarajan. Reductions among high di-
     mensional proximity problems. In Proc. 10th SODA, pages 769–778,
     2001.

[19] A. V. Goldberg, M. D. Grigoriadis, and R. E. Tarjan. Use of dynamic
     trees in a network simplex algorithm for the maximum flow problem.
     Math. Programming, 50:277–290, 1991.

[20] A. Goldman. Optimal center location in simple networks. Transportation
     Sci., 5:212–221, 1971.

[21] M. R. Henzinger and V. King. Randomized fully dynamic graph algo-
     rithms with polylogarithmic time per operation. J. JACM, 46(4):502–
     516, 1999. Announced at STOC’95.




                                     30
[22] J. Holm, K. de Lichtenberg, and M. Thorup. Poly-logarithmic deter-
     ministic fully-dynamic algorithms for connectivity, minimum spanning
     tree, 2-edge and biconnectivity. J. ACM, 48(4):723–760, 2001.

[23] A. Kanevsky, R. Tamassia, G. D. Battista, and J. Chen. On-line main-
     tenance of the four-connected components of a graph. In 32nd FOCS,
     pages 793–801, 1991.

[24] J. A. La Poutré. Dynamic graph algorithms and data structures. PhD
     thesis, Dep. Comp. Sci., Utrecht Uni., 1991.

[25] E. Nardelli, G. Proietti, and P. Widmayer. Finding all the best swaps
     of a minimum diameter spanning tree under transient edge failures. J.
     Graph Algorithms and Applications, 5(5):39–57, 2001.

[26] S. Peckham. Maintaining tree projections in amortized O(log n) time.
     Technical Report TR89-1034, Cornell Uni., Comp. Sci. Dep., 1989.

[27] J. A. L. Poutré. Maintenance of triconnected components of graphs. In
     Proc. 19th ICALP, LNCS 623, pages 354–365, 1992.

[28] J. A. L. Poutré. Alpha-algorithms for incremental planarity testing. In
     Proc. 26th STOC, pages 706–715, 1994.

[29] T. Radzik. Implementations of dynamic trees with in-subtree operations.
     ACM J. Experimental Algorithmics, 3:Article 9, 1998.

[30] D. Sleator and R. Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. J. Comput.
     Syst. Sci., 26(3):362–391, 1983. Announced at STOC’81.

[31] D. Sleator and R. Tarjan. Self-adjusting binary search trees. J. ACM,
     32:652–686, 1985.

[32] R. Tarjan. Dynamic trees and search trees via euler tours, applied to
     the network simplex algorithm. Technical Report 503-95, Dep. Comp.
     Sci., Princeton Uni., September 1995.

[33] M. Thorup. Fully-dynamic min-cut. In Proc. 33rd STOC, pages 224–
     230, 2001.

[34] M. Thorup and U. Zwick. Approximate distance oracles. In Proc. 33rd
     STOC, pages 183–192, 2001.

                                     31
[35] J. Westbrook and R. Tarjan. Maintaining bridge-connected and bicon-
     nected components on-line. Algorithmica, 7:433–464, 1992.




                                  32
